---
layout: post
title: Aeneid and Teleology: My Analysis of Universal Law 8
---

# *Aeneid* and Teleology:
In his analysis of the *Aeneid*, Struck discusses teleology as a driving force. During this discussion, Struck proposes his 8th universal law: those at the top of the power structure and the bottom of the power structure embrace the concept of teleology. He justifies this theory with the following logic. Those on top like it because no one can challenge their position if it's just the product of grand cosmic machinery. Those on the bottom like it because they can avoid taking responsibility for their low position and can instead blame the cosmic machinery. Those in the middle, Struck hints, want to believe that they can still reach the top, and so don’t want any  ‘cosmic machinery’ interfering with that goal. I take issue with Struck’s explanation of the middle tier’s dislike for teleology because the same logic seems to apply to the bottom tier, which Struck claims embraces teleology. Let me explain. Just like those in the middle of the power structure, those at the bottom have room for advancement - in fact, they have even more potential for upward social mobility than those in the middle. If the dislike for teleology stems from a desire to control one’s own future and facilitate one’s ascent, then those at the bottom of the power structure have an even greater reason to dislike it than those in the middle.

I propose an alternative view of the relationship between the middle tier and the concept of teleology. The middle has access to both benefits of teleology just to a smaller degree: they don't have to take responsibility for failing to reach the top, but if anyone below them every challenges them, they cite the cosmic machinery as authorization of their position. The way I see it, every level of the power level has some incentive to embrace teleology even if that incentive may be stronger for those at the top and the bottom. 
