---
layout: post
title: Structuralism in *Aeneid* and *Eumenides*
---


#### Structuralism: Voluntary and Blood Associations in the *Aeneid* and the *Eumenides*

From a structuralist point of view, the binary opposition between voluntary and blood associations is the driving force behind both the *Aeneid* and the *Eumenides*. The contrasting outcomes of these oppositions may reflect a contrasting cultural view between Greeks and Romans. 

The *Eumenides* could not have made the binary opposition any more apparent. The trial of Orestes, the main event of the play, can be read as a debate over which type of association is more important - blood or voluntary. To understand why, we must remind ourselves of the context of his trial. After returning from Troy, Agemmenon, Orestes’s father, is murdered by his wife, Clymanestra (and her lover Aegisthus). To avenge his father’s murder, Orestes murders his mother and Aegisthus. In order to determine whether Orestes’s actions were justified, the court must weigh the value of Clymenestra’s relationship with Agemmenon, a voluntary association, against the value of Orestes’s relationship with his mother, a blood relation. The general implication is that if a voluntary association is more valuable than a blood relation, then Orestes’s actions were justified; if a blood relation is more valuable, than his action were not justified. Orestes’s eventual acquittal suggests that voluntary associations beat blood associations. We cannot really conclude this as an explicit suggestion about contemporary Greek culture for several reasons. One main reason is that in his defense of Orestes, Apollo claims that there is no blood relation between mother and son and that the mother is “merely the vessel that nurtures, protects the sown seed.” If we buy Apollo’s argument, then the debate in the *Eumenides* is not about the comparative importance of blood associations vs. voluntary associations, but the comparative importance of voluntary associations vs. temporary caretaker associations. However, in general, it seems that the *Eumenides* is implying that voluntary associations are more important.

The opposite is true in the *Aeneid*. Although the binary opposition between voluntary/blood associations is not made as explicit as it was in the *Eumenides*, Vergil’s preference for one over the other is still clear. On the one hand, Vergil portrays Aeneas’s voluntary association with Dido as treacherous. Not only does it interfere with his mission of founding a city and cause him to (at least temporarily) violate the value of pietas, but it also leads to Dido’s suicide. On the other hand, Vergil portrays Aeneas’s blood association with Anchises as highly beneficial to his pursuit of pietas. Throughout the first 6 books, Anchises serves as a reliable source of advice and counsel, instructing Aeneas to consult the Delian oracle, interpreting Aeneas’s dream about the household gods, encouraging Aeneas to leave the weaker Trojans in Sicily, and finally (during Aeneas’s visit to the underworld) teaching Aeneas about the structure of the cosmos and the role of the Romans. Vergil frames his view of the binary opposition between voluntary/blood associations as an evaluation of each side’s effect on the pursuit of pietas. Voluntary associations undermine pietas, while blood relations contribute to pietas so clearly Vergil holds blood relations in higher regard.

Vergil’s promotion of blood relations stands in stark contrast to the *Eumenides*’s disregard for them. I am not sure this conflict in myth reflects an actual cultural conflict between Greeks and Romans (ie. Romans valued blood relations above all and Greeks valued voluntary associations above all). That is something I plan to research further. 
