---
layout: post
title: Legacy of the Industrial Revolution
---


*Although the Industrial Revolution is not exactly a classics subject, it is a topic I have been interested in for a while now. Here's an essay that I wrote about its legacy.*

## Marxism and the Malthusian Trap 
	
	
The Industrial Revolution, a transition to new manufacturing processes in Europe and the U.S. between 1760 and 1840, was characterized by technological, socioeconomic, and cultural advances. Although socialists such as Marx condemned industrialization and capitalism as instruments of oppression and exploitation, in reality, they improved the standard of living by overcoming the Malthusian trap and widening the wealth distribution through the expansion of the middle class.

By demonstrating the disadvantages of capitalist free market economics, the Industrial Revolution triggered the development of Marxism. Under capitalism, the government’s role was extremely limited. Capitalists believed that the government should protect property rights and individual freedoms, but it should not tax or regulate businesses because the free market would solve economic problems through competition and free trade without government intervention. However, in nineteenth century Britain, this self-correction mechanism seemed to be malfunctioning. Even as the economy and technology flourished, living and working conditions for the working class worsened. In order to increase production and maximize profit margins, employers utilized child labor, provided tiny wages for grueling daylong labor, and refused to implement safety measures to prevent injury. The lower classes suffered not only from horrific working conditions, but also from crowded living conditions. The mass exodus from the countryside to urban areas created a breeding ground for infectious disease in overpopulated, unplanned, and filthy working class neighborhoods. Due to the prevalence of unhealthy conditions, the life expectancy declined significantly. While free market economists and capitalists praised Britain, not all were impressed by its obsession with individualism and minimal government. Karl Marx, born in Germany, but residing in England, witnessed the struggles of the working class and the trappings of industrial production. Recognizing the failure of the government to provide for key public needs, such as healthcare, education, housing, and jobs, he condemned capitalist societies for rewarding greed at the expense of common good. Marx’s disgust for capitalism was magnified by its supporters’ efforts against laws to protect workers in the workplace, against healthcare for the poor, and against support for the elderly. From these (and other) observations, Marx deduced his theory of class struggle. According to his theory, conflict between the bourgeoisie, the middle and upper class, and the proletariat, the lower classes, was responsible for all historical and social change. As the owners of the means of production, the bourgeoisie employ the proletariat and pay them a wage for their labor. However, the bourgeoisie use this proletarian labor to produce goods that are sold for more money than the wage of the proletarian. By keeping the profit, the bourgeoisie become wealthy, while the proletariat struggle to survive. Realizing that wage exploitation and income inequality were inevitable products of capitalism, Marx advocated for a new socialist system, where the government would own the nation’s property and wealth and apply those resources for the common good, guaranteeing healthcare, jobs, housing, and retirement pensions to all its people. Marx’s ideas became most influential in the twentieth century when they were applied (often erroneously) in Russia, China, Vietnam, and other countries. Even today, certain countries, such as Cuba and North Korea remain communist, and vestiges of socialism survive in the form of social welfare laws. In the US, the emergence of a new group of democratic socialist representatives suggests that Marx’s ideas, where were initially a reaction to the Industrial Revolution, will endure for the foreseeable future.

Although Marx viewed capitalism and industrialization as agents of dehumanization, contemporary data suggests that the Industrial Revolution actually improved the standard of living and expanded the middle class. The most apparent sign of this phenomenon was the increase in real wages (wages adjusted for inflation). By encouraging competition among entrepreneurs, industrialization drove down the prices of manufactured and agricultural goods. Therefore, in Britain, even though nominal wages remained constant,  real wages skyrocketed, with blue-collar wages doubling between 1810 and 1850. Higher wages resulted in significant improvements in the quality of life, especially with regard to diet; the consumption of domestic products that were once considered luxuries, such as meat, vegetables, and fruits, as well as the consumption of imported foods, such as cheese, cocoa, coffee, rice, and sugar, increased dramatically. By 1850, the average weekly English diet, consisting of five ounces of butter, thirty ounces of meat, fifty-six ounces of potatoes, and sixteen ounces of fruit and vegetables, began to resemble what it is today. However, this increase in food consumption per capita was not in itself monumental; Europe had often experienced such increases, but they had always been short term, a phenomena explained by the theory of the Malthusian trap. Conceived by Thomas Malthus, it suggested that technological advancements could increase a society’s supply of food, but that the ensuing abundance of resources would enable population growth, which would in turn bring per capita consumption back to its original level. Prior to the Industrial Revolution, agricultural and demographic trends largely supported this theory. However, between 1780 and 1860 (the Industrial Revolution), the population of England and Wales rose 1.25 percent per year even as food consumption continued to increase. The Industrial Revolution overcame the Malthusian trap by accelerating efficiency in production, which, for the first time, grew fast enough to outpace population growth and allow average incomes to rise. In doing so, it liberated humanity from the vicious cycle of brief prosperity followed by long-term turmoil, paving the path towards a future of consistent economic growth. Not only did the Industrial Revolution break the bonds of Malthus, but it also facilitated the emergence of a new middle class towards the end of the nineteenth century. Before that point, society had been divided in two classes: the aristocracy and the working class. However, industrialization rendered this class system obsolete by creating demand for new white-collar jobs associated with urban industries, such as business people, clerks, lawyers, shopkeepers, insurance agents, merchants, accountants, managers, doctors, lawyers, and teachers.  Since the ability to hire servants to cook and clean the home from time to time was a distinguishing characteristic of the middle class, the increase in the number of domestic servants from 900,000 to 1.4 million between 1851 and 1871 provides solid evidence of its expansion. The emergence of the middle class permanently modified the role and structure of families. Prior to the Industrial Revolution, women and men both contributed to the farming effort. However, this new middle class altered gender roles by discouraging adult women from working outside the home. In addition, as children increasingly became an economic burden rather than an advantage, the fertility rate among middle class women declined significantly. For middle class families, the home assumed a new role as a refuge from stressful industrial life; the concepts of work and home, which had once been so closely associated, were intentionally divorced. By overcoming Malthus’s doctrine, enlarging the middle class, and remodeling families and homes, the Industrial Revolution dramatically improved the quality of life. 
