---
layout: post
title: My Analysis of a Heraclitus Quote
---

### My Analysis of a Heraclitus Quote

*Note: I have begun another online course from UPenn. This one is titled **Ancient Philosophy: Plato and His Predecessors.** I have just completed week 1 of this course. Just like the previous course, this one has discussion questions. Below, I have shared my response to one of the more interesting prompts from week 1.*

***Prompt:** Heraclitus is often credited with saying “you can never step into the same river twice.” What he actually said is in Fragment B12: “Upon those who step into the same rivers different and again different waters flow.” What is the crucial difference between these two formulations?*

The crucial difference between the quote misattributed to Heraclitus (“you can never step into the same river twice”) and the actual quote (“Upon those who step into the same rivers different and again different waters flow.”) is Heraclitus's implication of the contrast between the observations of our senses and the conclusions of our reason.

In Heraclitus's quote, the explicit distinction between "river" and "flow" emphasizes that the river remains the same even as the currents within it change. In other words, despite the variance in physical sensation observed by our senses, arising from the variance in "flow," we can employ our reason to determine that the "river" itself hasn't changed. Heraclitus is not only pointing out the constancy and underlying order which accompany change, but also the necessity of taking advantage of our reason to find that constancy. In that sense, this quote mirrors another equally famous Heraclitus quote, which makes explicit the futility of relying on one's senses in leilieu of one's reason: "Eyes and ears are bad witnesses to men who have barbarian souls" (B107).

The misattributed quote similarly implies that constancy ("same river") and change ("never...twice") go hand in hand, but it does not express the contrast between senses and reason. Unlike the Heraclitus quote, the misattributed quotes does not clarify what creates the disparity in the river. In the Heraclitus quote, we know the cause of the disparity because it tells us what happens "upon" stepping in the river. The misattributed quote tells us that this circumstance (stepping in the same river) will "never" come to pass, implying that the cause of the disparity is not a physical sensation, but rather general familiarity with natural phenomena. For all we know, it might have nothing to do with physical sensing the change in the flow, but rather reasoning that environment forces like erosion have altered the river or reasoning that the changes in the distribution of rocks have slightly affected the current. My point is that in the misattributed quote, the variance and the constancy of the river both arise from a calculated judgement - from reason. Thus, the quote does not make any distinction between reason and senses and does not imply that only one of them should be trusted. It does not imply that change is easy to sense, but the underlying order can only be discovered through the application of logos. Instead, the misattributed quote presents a situation where both order and variance are accessed through reason. This example does not undermine, but also does not support Heraclitus's thesis about the inadequacy of one's senses in providing a perspective into logos.

To make my argument abundantly clear, the Heraclitus quote demonstrates that reason gives you access to logos, and the senses do not, instead only giving you access to a superficial notion of variance. The misattributed quote does not make any reference to the inadequacy of the senses - all it does is show the power of reason in general (leading you to anything you want whether it be logos or variance), but not the unique nature of that power in that it alone leads you to logos.
