---
layout: post
title: My Answer to Euthyphro's Dilemma from a Jewish Perspective
---

#### My Answer to Euthyphro's Dilemma from a Jewish Perspective

Although I agree that God approves of just actions, I am not sure whether the standard for good is separate from God or God himself is the source of goodness. Different parts of the Bible seem to yield opposite conclusions.

Genesis 18:25 suggests that the former conclusion: "Far be it from You to do such a thing, to bring death upon the innocent as well as the guilty, so that the innocent and guilty fare alike. Far be it from You! Shall not the Judge of all the earth deal justly?" As Abraham seeks to persuade God to spare Sodom, he begs him to "deal justly." This fragment divorces God and the standard for justice. If God himself were that standard, then it would be impossible for him to "not...deal justly" because his actions would be the very definition of justice. The only world where God could act unjustly and violate the standard for justice would be a world where the standard for justice existed separately. Abraham's use of the phrase "Far be it from you" further suggests that although God typically acts in accordance to a certain standard, he is not constrained by it. This implication mirrors the view of Socrates and his contemporaries who similarly viewed the gods as moral beings, but still acknowledged their flaws and potential for immoral behavior.

Even as Abraham's interaction suggests that the standard for justice is separate from God, arbitrary laws like kashrut suggest the opposite. Jewish philosophy divides the 613 commandments into 3 categories: laws that have a rational explanation and would be enacted by any orderly society, laws that have a rational explanation, but would not be enacted had they not be explained by the torah, and laws that have no rational explanation, known as *chukim*. By the very admission of the rabbis, an entire category of Hebrew laws is COMPLETELY ARBITRARY! There is nothing inherently unjust about eating a pig nor is there any explanation for the prohibition against it. The only possible reason for the existence of such *chukim* is that God approves/disapproves of certain behavior, and expects us humans to act in accordance to his preferences. In other words, an action is pious if God loves it and impious if God hates it.

From two different Biblical concepts, I have derived the two opposite answers to Euthyphro's dilemma. Personally, I am more inclined to believe that God himself is the source of goodness. After all, Abraham begging God to "deal justly" is only evidence of his perspective and not necessarily indicative of reality. Just because Abraham says that God has the potential to deal unjustly doesn't mean that he actually does. The existence of *chukim*, on the other hand, provides incontestable evidence of the arbitrary nature of God's judgement, which in turn implies that his judgement stems not from a universal independent standard, but rather from his own approval/disapproval of certain actions.
