---
layout: post
title: Letters from a Stoic - Letter XI
---

### Letter XI: On the blush of modesty

#### Summary:
This letter revolves around the idea of inborn weakness and their persistant nature. Seneca claims that although the pursuit of wisdom and philsophy can diminish those weaknesses, they can never be truly eradicated. He brings up the example of blushing, a natural occurence that can neither be conjured nor supressed, to justify to this claim.

#### My Reaction:

##### Intial Reaction
This sort of claim always worries me a little. Although it may be true that "no amount of wisdom" can prevent blushing, the same does not hold true for other potential inborn weaknesses, such as personality. By telling people that they will never succeed in overcoming their flaws, he discourages them from seeking self-improvement. It is a dangerous claim because people will believe that it absolves them of the responsiblity for personal growth.

##### After Reading Letter XVI
In letter 16, Seneca argues that the distinguishing characteristic of an unnatural desire is that it can never be satisfied: "if after going a long way there is always something remaining further, be sure it is not something natural." Now, if we apply this same logic to Seneca's claim in letter 11, we can infer a very intriguing conclusion. Here's my logic:

1. Desire that can never be fully satisfied is unnatural
2. Overcoming inborn weaknesses is impossible
3. No matter how much wisdom you acquire, you can never fully eradicate your inborn faults
4. Therefore, self-improvement is a desire that cannot be satisfied!
5. By Seneca's logic, self-improvement is an unnatural desire? 

I wonder if this is intentional. Did Seneca not believe in self-improvement? I am sure that future readings will clarify this for me. But still very interesting!
