---
layout: post
title: How the Aeneid Resists a Functionalist Reading
---
**Discussion question unit 9: how does the *Aeneid* resist the endorsement of a functionalist reading?**

Vergil's tendency to create ambivalence suggests that a functionalist reading is not appropriate. I will clarify my argument with a comparison to the Odyssey. As discussed earlier in the course, the Odyssey can be read as a functionalist endorsement of the cultural value of xenia. When treating the topic of xenia, Homer leaves little room for misinterpretation: he indicates that adherence to xenia is good and any violation is bad. When the cyclops violates the concept of xenia, he loses his sight. When the suitors violate the concept of xenia, they lose their lives. My point is that Homer makes it abundantly clear to the reader that they're supposed to act in a certain way or they'll have to face the consequences. Vergil, on the other hand, treats the concept of pietas with ambivalence. If he were to seeking to legitimize it, we would expect him (based on the Homeric precedent) to show us what terrible things happen to those who violate pietas and what great things happen to those who follow it. Instead, we see that Aeneas's fulfillment of his duty (through the abandonment of Dido) leads to him feeling guilty and Dido killing herself. Although Aeneas making progress toward his goal of founding a city is a good consequence, the concomitant suicide and guilt is not. Any reader will think twice about adhering to pietas knowing the potential consequences. Vergil isn't so much authorizing the concept of pietas as he is warning us to be cautious of it. In much the same way, the rest of the *Aeneid* doesn't lend itself well to a functionalist reading. 
